### Automated factor network comparison

As outlined in our previous report, the structural comparison of two
competing factor networks is a very important portion of model analysis.
For two competing models (each represented by a factor network) that
model the same natural phenomenon, we would like to generate comparative
sensitivity reports about the shared inputs of the two models (i.e.
inputs that both models have in common). In order to do this, we must
first determine the portions of the factor networks of the two models
that overlap, based upon shared inputs and outputs. Doing this allows us
to compare the uncertainty in model output between two models as a
function of the shared model inputs.

The team has accomplished the task of discovering the shared portion of
two factor networks derived from the two evapotranspiration models
highlighted in our grant proposal, the ASCE and the Priestley-Taylor
models. Below, we show a graphical representation of the shared portions
of these two models, which are represented by a new structure that we
are referring to as a Forward Influence Blanket (FIB). In the following
section we will formally define the structure of a FIB and its use-case
for model analysis.

---

![Forward influence blanket for the Priestley-Taylor model](figs/cmb_pt.png)
**Figure 1:** Graphical view of the FIB for the Priestley-Taylor factor network.
<br>

---

![Forward influence blanket for the ASCE model](figs/cmb_asce.png)
**Figure 2:** Graphical view of the FIB for the ASCE factor network.
<br>

---

### Forward Influence Blanket (FIB) description

A common method for isolating a probabilistic subnetwork is to form a
[Markov Blanket](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_blanket) around
a node of interest. To form a full Markov blanket, all of the
parent nodes of the subnetwork of interest, as well as all the child
nodes and parents of child nodes must be included, in order to fully
isolate the probabilistic subnetwork. This is required in order to
perform both forward and reverse inference on the subnetwork. However,
for the purposes of model analysis we are currently only interested in
questions pertaining to forward analysis (i.e. how do inputs to the
model affect the output). Therefore we have created a loose variant of a
Markov blanket that we have named a Forward Influence Blanket (FIB). Our
rationale for this naming is that a FIB is a _blanket_ around a
probabilistic subnetwork that only captures the information necessary to
determine the _influence_ that nodes have on each other in the _forward_
direction.

The two FIBs shown in the section above are color-coded to provide a
visual depiction of the different components of a FIB. Let us consider
the FIB for the shared subnetwork of the ASCE evapotranspiration model.
We can see that some nodes are colored blue, and of those nodes some are
bolded. All blue nodes in the network represent shared nodes that are
also present in the Priestley-Taylor evapotranspiration model. The blue
nodes that are bolded represent nodes that are shared inputs to both
models (these are likely the nodes of highest interest for model
analysis). Between the blue nodes in our FIB we have a series of one or
more black nodes. These nodes are nodes that are found in the ASCE
factor network but are not present in the Priestley-Taylor factor
network. These nodes likely represent a difference in the computation
used to derive the shared output from the shared inputs in these two
models and they will likely be the cause of differences observed in
model output uncertainty during analysis. We also observe nodes in the
ASCE FIB that are colored green. These nodes are part of the blanket
portion of the FIB that allow us to isolate the probabilistic
subnetworks of the two models. We will need to observe values for these
nodes as well when conducting uncertainty analysis.

### Sensitivity index discovery

In our previous report we demonstrated the ability to automatically
conduct sensitivity analysis on the inputs to the source code of an
extract models factor network. The method we presented involved three
steps to fully conduct a sensitivity analysis of a given function *f*:

1. Take *N* samples from the input space of *f* using Saltelli sampling
2. Evaluate each of the *N* samples on *f* to form the set *E*
3. Perform Sobol analysis on *E*
4. Recover the $$S_1$$, $$S_2$$, and $$S_T$$ sensitivity indices

This method has been successful in retrieving all the information we
needed in order to determine which inputs account for the most
uncertainty in model output. Since our last report we began
experimenting to see how the runtime of sensitivity analysis is affected
by varying the sample size *N* or the size of the input space of
function *f*. Below we show graphs that depict runtime as a function of
the two previously mentioned variables. For each of these graphs the red
line shows the runtime for the entirety of sensitivity analysis and the
blue line shows the runtime of part (3) of the analysis as we vary the
variable under inspection.

##### Runtime as a function of sample size

As our models become more complex we expect that we will need to
increase the number of samples taken and evaluated in order to achieve a
similar amount of accuracy in sensitivity index estimation during
sensitivity analysis. Because of this, we determined that we needed to
empirically inspect the runtime of sensitivity analysis as the number of
samples increases. From the graph below, we can see that the increase in
runtime as the number of samples increases is roughly linear, both for
the entirety of sensitivity analysis and for the Sobol portion of
sensitivity analysis. This result is encouraging because it ensures that
as long as we maintain only a linear increase in the number of samples
required to conduct sensitivity analysis on our larger models then we
should not see a runtime increase that would render sensitivity analysis
unusable.

<br>
![Visual depiction of increase in runtime for our Sobol
analysis method given an increase in sample size. The blue line depicts
the increase in runtime for the Sobol algorithm and the red line depicts
the runtime for the total program.](figs/sa_samples_vs_runtime.png)
**Figure 3:** Visual depiction of increase in runtime for our Sobol
analysis method given an increase in sample size. The blue line depicts
the increase in runtime for the Sobol algorithm and the red line depicts
the runtime for the total program.
<br>

##### Runtime as a function of input space size

The models we plan on extracting from the DSSAT library will likely have
a very large number of inputs. This entails that the size of our input space
will be much larger than in the examples we have studied thus far.
Therefore, we determined that we needed to empirically observe the
affects of increasing the input space size (via increasing the number of
model inputs) on the runtime of sensitivity analysis. From the graph
below, we can see that as we linearly increase the amount of inputs to a
model, the runtime for the Sobol portion of sensitivity analysis
increases greater than linearly. We also notice that this increase in
runtime for the Sobol portion explains the greater than linear increase
in runtime for the entirety of sensitivity analysis. This result is
discouraging as our models of interest are likely going to have a large
number of inputs (for example the ASCE evapotranspiration model has 12
inputs). In order to handle larger models we are planning on
investigating methods of computing sensitivity analysis on subnetworks
of the models that have fewer inputs. This was a key motivation for the
development of Forward Influence Blankets as mentioned earlier in the
report that will allow us to study sensitivity analysis only on the
shared components of two large competing models of the same phenomena.
<br> ![Visual depiction of increase in runtime for our Sobol analysis
method given an increase in number of inputs for the function under
analysis. The blue line depicts the increase in runtime for the Sobol
algorithm and the red line depicts the runtime for the total
program.](figs/sa_inputs_vs_runtime.png) 
**Figure 4:** Visual depiction of increase in runtime for our Sobol
analysis method given an increase in number of inputs for the function
under analysis. The blue line depicts the increase in runtime for the
Sobol algorithm and the red line depicts the runtime for the total
program.
<br>

##### Sensitivity index stability

After reviewing the runtime requirements of sensitivity analysis, the
next question our team desired to answer was: how many samples are
necessary for the estimated sensitivity indices to be stable? To
visualize this we experimented with the PLANT model by varying the
number of samples supplied to our sensitivity analysis metric and
recording the S1 indices for the two inputs with highest sensitivity.
From our results it seems that the amount of samples needed to reach
stability of the S1 indices is much higher than the amount needed to
determine the ordering of which variables contribute the most
uncertainty to model output. As we will discuss in the following section
one of our plans for the next iteration of model analysis is to
implement efficient sampling methods that can allow our estimates of the
sensitivity indices to converge with far fewer samples.

<br>
![Visual depiction of changes in stability of S1 sensitivity
indices with respect to increases in sample size from Saltelli sampling.
The model under evaluation for this test was the PLANT model from
the SimpleModular crop model.](figs/plant_s1_est.png)
**Figure 4:** Visual depiction of changes in stability of S1 sensitivity
indices with respect to increases in sample size from Saltelli sampling.
The model under evaluation for this test was the PLANT model from
the SimpleModular crop model.
<br>

### Next steps

##### Sensitivity index propagation

We anticipate that users of AutoMATES will likely want a visual
understanding of how uncertainty is being propagated through our
extracted factor networks that represent their models of interest. In
order to accommodate this desire we plan on adapting our sensitivity
index discovery methods to be done on piecewise subnetworks of our
factor networks (and FIBs) in a recursive style. This would mean that we
would only consider the immediate parents of a node when running
sensitivity analysis of that particular node. Afterwards we would
conduct sensitivity analysis on each of the parent nodes to determine
the sensitivity indices for each of the parent nodes' parents. Doing this
will allow us to see how sensitivity propagates from the input nodes to
output of any model under study at the finest granularity possible given
our modeling structure.

##### Bayesian sampling for Sensitivity Analysis

Given the results we have presented on in the increase in runtime for
our Sobol algorithm with respect to an increase in sample size and an
increase in the number of inputs, we have decided to investigate
measures to increase the effectiveness of our sampling methods. Although
runtime only increases linearly with an increase in the number of
samples, the amount of samples needed as the number of inputs increases
will increase exponentially due to [the curse of
dimensionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_dimensionality).
In order to combat this affect and keep our number of necessary samples
to a minimum we are investigating sampling methods via [Bayesian
Optimization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_optimization) that
will allow us to sample our larger search spaces efficiently by taking
into account prior information about the models discovered during text
reading, equation detection, and program analysis.
