## GrFN Specification

During this phase, significant extensions were made to the GrFN
specification that serves as the central representation between program
analysis (which extracts variables and the network of functions among
them) and model analysis (where the variables and their functional
relationships are treated generally as a probabilistic dynamic systems
model). The extensions include the following.

### Identifiers

Prior to this update, a variety of naming conventions were used to
represent source code identifiers (names for program entities such as
variables, constants, functions, etc.), and the disambiguating context
in which they are defined. Identifiers now systematically represent
*namespaces* and program *scope* as part of their definition, along with
their *base name*. The representation of identifiers includes the
following additions and advantages:

- `<identifier_spec>` declarations in GrFN associate identifier usage,
  such as the location within source code of where the identifier was
declared, as well as \"aliases\" (other names used to refer to the same
program elements). The location of identifier use will be used to
connect identifiers with source code comments and documentation strings.
Also, base names, aliases, and namespaces will be used as evidence for
*grounding* variables to model domain concepts.
	
- Inclusion of namespace and scope context in identifier definitions
  make it possible for program analysis to represent the context of
Fortran program Modules. This context also provides a consistent method
for extending source code analysis beyond single source code files.
	
- An `<identifier string>` provides a single human-readable instance of
  an identifier while consistently representing all of its definitional
information: namespace, scope, and base name. These will be used to
denote instances of identifiers used in generated GrFN JSON (outside of
the identifier declaration specs). For example, 

	````
	"CROP_YIELD::UPDATE_EST.loop$1::YIELD_EST"
	````

is an identifier for a variable name originally given as
\"YIELD\_EST\" in source code, but defined in the \"CROP\_YIELD\"
namespace, and within the first loop of the function \"UPDATE\_EST\".
	
- Since identifiers themselves are now defined in terms of structured
  information (namespace, scope, and base name), identifier `<gensym>`s
have been introduced to be used as unambiguous standins for identifiers
used in generated intermediate target Python code.

### Variable and Function Naming Conventions

The new systematic representation of namespace and scope rules for
identifiers made it possible to clean up some of the previous ad-hoc
approaches to naming variables and functions. New naming conventions
have been introduced.

### Conditions

The approach to representing program conditions (i.e., \"if
statements\") was also updated. When program analysis analyzes a
conditional in source code, a \"condition\" assignment function is
introduced that sets the state of a variable representing the condition,
and then one or more \"decision\" assignment functions are introduce
that represent updates to other variables depending on the outcome of
the condition.

### Specification Links

Finally, there was a significant rewrite of the specification
introduction as well as updates throughout to improve readability and
ensure consistency. 

The release version of the GrFN specification as of this report is
linked here [GrFN Specification Version
0.1.m3](GrFN_specification_v0.1.m3). (For the latest development
version, see the [Delphi docs](https://ml4ai.github.io/delphi/grfn_spec.html).)

